2023
AP® United States
History
Sample Student Responses
and Scoring Commentary
Set 1
Inside:
Long Essay Question 2
Scoring Guidelines
Student Samples
Scoring Commentary
© 2023 College Board. College Board, Advanced Placement, AP, AP Central, and the acorn logo are registered
trademarks of College Board. Visit College Board on the web: collegeboard.org.
AP Central is the official online home for the AP Program: apcentral.collegeboard.org.
AP® United States History 2023 Scoring Guidelines
Question 2: Long Essay Question, Transatlantic Trade 6 points
General Scoring Notes
• Except where otherwise noted, each point of these rubrics is earned independently; for example, a student could earn a point for evidence
without earning a point for thesis/claim.
• Accuracy: The components of these rubrics require that students demonstrate historically defensible content knowledge. Given the timed nature
of the exam, essays may contain errors that do not detract from their overall quality, as long as the historical content used to advance the
argument is accurate.
• Clarity: Exam essays should be considered first drafts and thus may contain grammatical errors. Those errors will not be counted against a student
unless they obscure the successful demonstration of the content knowledge, skills, and practices described below.
Evaluate the extent to which the growth of transatlantic trade changed British North American colonial society from 1607 to 1776.
© 2023 College Board
AP® United States History 2023 Scoring Guidelines
Reporting
Scoring Criteria
Category
Row A 0 points 1 point
Thesis/Claim Does not meet the criteria for one point. Responds to the prompt with a historically defensible thesis/claim that establishes a line of
reasoning.
(0-1 points)
Decision Rules and Scoring Notes
Responses that do not earn this point: Responses that earn this point:
• Are not historically defensible. Provide a historically defensible thesis or claim about how the growth of transatlantic trade
• Only restate or rephrase the prompt. changed British North American colonial societies from 1607 to 1776. The thesis must suggest
at least one main line of argument development or establish the analytic categories of the
• Do not respond to the prompt.
argument.
• Do not establish a line of reasoning.
• Are overgeneralized.
Examples that do not earn this point: Examples that earn this point:
Provide an overly generalized response to the prompt Establish a line of reasoning that evaluates the topic of the prompt with analytic categories
• “The growth of transatlantic trade led to major economic and • “The most significant and lasting impact of the growth of transatlantic trade was the
social changes in society.” increase in the racial, religious, and ethnic diversity of the colonies, while another
important but less significant impact was the Anglicization of colonial society.”
Provide a restatement of the prompt
• “North American society changed as a result of the growth of Establish a line of reasoning with analytic categories
trade in the Atlantic.” • “The growth of trade in the Atlantic led to the spread of Enlightenment ideas and debates
about British taxes, both of which contributed to the movement for independence.”
Provide a claim that is not historically defensible
• “The growth of transatlantic trade led to the development of a Establish a line of reasoning
diverse economy in the British colonies that included the large- • “The growth of transatlantic trade led to more slavery in the colonies.” (Minimally
scale manufacturing of consumer goods and extensive silver acceptable thesis/claim)
mining.”
Additional Notes:
• The thesis or claim must consist of one or more sentences located in one place, either in the introduction or the conclusion (which may not be limited to the first
or last paragraphs).
• The thesis or claim must identify a relevant development(s) in the period, although it is not required to encompass the entire period.
© 2023 College Board
AP® United States History 2023 Scoring Guidelines
Reporting
Scoring Criteria
Category
Row B 0 points 1 point
Contextualization Does not meet the criteria for one point. Describes a broader historical context relevant to the prompt.
(0-1 points)
Decision Rules and Scoring Notes
Responses that do not earn this point: Responses that earn this point:
• Provide an overgeneralized statement about the time period Accurately describe a context relevant to how the growth of transatlantic trade changed
referenced in the prompt. British North American colonial societies from 1607 to 1776.
• Provide context that is not relevant to the prompt.
• Provide a passing phase or reference.
Examples that do not earn this point: Examples of relevant context that earn this point include the following, if appropriate
elaboration is provided:
Do not provide context relevant to the topic of the prompt
• Native American society before the colonization of North America
• “The ancestors of the Native Americans migrated from Asia
• Spanish (or other European) colonization before 1600
long ago on a land bridge across the Bering Sea.”
• The economic motivations for exploration
Provide an overgeneralized statement about the time period
• Initial British colonization of North America in the 1600s
referenced in the prompt
• East Asia trade (e.g., tea)
• “Europeans built tons and tons of boats between 1607 and
1776. These boats were used to travel all over the world.” • Imperial competition among European powers
• The Revolutionary War
Example of acceptable contextualization:
• “The Spanish and Portuguese established large profitable colonies in the Americas before
the English successfully founded a permanent settlement at Jamestown. The wealth of
these early Spanish and Portuguese colonies from things like silver inspired other European
countries to start colonies and eventually led to massive trade in the Atlantic.”
• “Throughout the early 1600s colonies started forming for different reasons such as
religious and economic reasons. This is seen as the Jamestown colony created for profit.”
(Minimally acceptable context)
Additional Notes:
• The response must relate the topic of the prompt to broader historical events, developments, or processes that occur before, during, or continue after the
time frame of the question.
• To earn this point, the context provided must be more than a phrase or reference.
© 2023 College Board
AP® United States History 2023 Scoring Guidelines
Reporting
Scoring Criteria
Category
Row C 0 points 1 point 2 points
Evidence Does not meet the criteria for one Provides specific examples of evidence relevant to the topic Supports an argument in response to the prompt using
point. of the prompt. specific and relevant examples of evidence.
(0-2 points)
Decision Rules and Scoring Notes
Responses that do not earn points: Responses that earn 1 point: Responses that earn 2 points:
• Identify a single piece of evidence. Identify at least two specific historical examples relevant to Use at least two specific historical examples to support
• Provide evidence that is not how the growth of transatlantic trade changed British North an argument regarding how the growth of transatlantic
relevant to the topic of prompt. American colonial societies from 1607 to 1776. trade changed British North American colonial societies
from 1607 to 1776.
• Provide evidence that is outside the
time period or region specified in Examples of evidence that are specific and relevant include Examples that successfully support an argument with
the prompt. the following (two examples required): evidence:
• Repeat information that is specified • Indentured servitude • “The growth of the fur trade led colonists to form
in the prompt. • Transatlantic slave trade relationships with Indigenous societies in northern
colonies that contributed to cultural exchange.”
• Fur Trade
Examples that do not earn points: (Uses evidence to support an argument about
• Mercantilism
changes in colonial society that resulted from
Provide evidence that is outside the • First Great Awakening interactions with Indigenous Americans)
time period
• Enlightenment • “The growth of trade in the Atlantic helped spread
• “The British impressed sailors on
• Anglicization religious ideas from Europe to the colonies which
American merchant ships which
contributed to the first Great Awakening.” (Uses
made Americans very mad and • Declaration of Independence
evidence to support an argument about the impact
contributed to another war with • Salutary neglect
of transatlantic trade on culture)
Britain.” • Navigation Acts
• “The British allowed the colonists a fair amount of
• Tobacco, sugar, rice freedom to trade during salutary neglect, but when
• Sugar Act that changed, it led to resentment in colonial
• Townshend Acts society.” (Uses evidence to support an argument
about changes in the colonist loyalty to Britain)
• Tea Act
Example of a statement that earns one point for evidence:
• “The British regulated colonial trade with things like the
Sugar Act and Tea Act.”
Additional Notes:
• Typically, statements credited as evidence will be more specific than statements credited as contextualization.
• If a response has a multipart argument, then it can meet the threshold of two pieces of evidence by giving one example for one part of the argument and
another example for a different part of the argument, but the total number of examples must still be at least two.
(For example, supporting a two-part argument about increases in ethnic and intellectual diversity, using evidence about the New Netherlands and
Enlightenment.)
© 2023 College Board
AP® United States History 2023 Scoring Guidelines
Reporting
Scoring Criteria
Category
Row D 0 points 1 point 2 points
Analysis and Does not meet the criteria Uses historical reasoning (e.g., comparison, causation, Demonstrates a complex understanding of the historical development
Reasoning for one point. continuity, and change) to frame or structure an that is the focus of the prompt, using evidence to corroborate, qualify, or
argument that addresses the prompt. modify an argument that addresses the question.
(0-2 points)
Decision Rules and Scoring Notes
Responses that do not Responses that earn 1 point: Responses that earn 2 points:
earn points: Must demonstrate the use of historical reasoning to May demonstrate a complex understanding in a variety of ways, such as:
• May include evidence explain how the growth of transatlantic trade changed • Explaining the nuance of an issue by analyzing multiple variables.
but offer no reasoning British North American colonial societies from 1607 to
• Explaining both similarity and difference, or explaining both continuity
to connect the 1776, although the reasoning may be uneven, limited,
and change, or explaining multiple causes, or explaining both causes
evidence to an or imbalanced.
and effects.
argument.
• Explaining relevant and insightful connections within and across
• May assert the use of
periods.
historical reasoning but
• Confirming the validity of an argument by corroborating multiple
does not use it to
perspectives across themes.
frame or structure an
argument. • Qualifying or modifying an argument by considering diverse or
alternative views or evidence.
Examples that do not earn Using a historical reasoning process to frame or Demonstrating complex understanding might include any of the
points: structure an argument could include: following, if appropriate elaboration is provided:
• Explaining how transatlantic trade caused the • The response argues that transatlantic trade led to a steady increase
Provide evidence but offer
spread of plantation agriculture that led to an in the diversity of colonial society from 1607 to 1776. The response
no reasoning to connect
increase in slavery. corroborates this argument with evidence from across themes about
the evidence to an
argument • Discussing how transatlantic trade led to an how various factors like cultural exchange, economic incentives, and
• “Mercantilism was an increase in the presence of different European imperial competition contributed to this steady increase in diversity
religious and ethnic groups, which contributed to a over time.
economic system used
significant degree of pluralism and intellectual • The response argues that British attempts to regulate transatlantic
by the British in their
exchange. trade led to a decreasing loyalty to Britain in colonial society that
colonies. It was
designed to regulate
culminated in the Declaration of Independence. The response then
qualifies that argument with evidence of a gradual Anglicization of
trade.”
Example of acceptable use of historical reasoning: colonial society that in some ways brought the colonies and Britain
• “Early on, tobacco proved to be a very profitable closer.
crop for the Virginia colony in transatlantic trade. • The response argues that transatlantic trade changed the ethnic,
This created a demand for labor which at first
racial, and religious makeup of the colonies. It then qualifies that
brought in a significant number of European
argument with evidence of demographic continuities, including a
indentured servants and later enslaved Africans.”
consistent Native American presence and constant migration from
(Indicates a change resulting from transatlantic Britain.
trade)
Additional Notes:
This demonstration of complex understanding must be part of the argument, not merely a phrase or reference.
© 2023 College Board
Page 1 of 1 2A
Since the beginning of the Era of Exploration, European nations had been funding groundbreaking navigation
trips to never-before-explored areas, developing colonies, and establishing trade. Explorers such as Vasco De Gama,
Ferdinand Magellen, Christopher Columbus were funded by monarchs such as Isabella of Spain and aided by
technology such as carvel ships and astrolabes. Once landed, nations quickly established colonies, with those such as
Spanish conquistadors using immense force to combat Native populations. The unique resources and immense
wealth brought about by these colonies were exchanged throughout trade routes, one of the most notable being the
transatlantic trade route. Although it furthered the British North American colonies' ties to England, transatlantic
trade succeeded in drastically changing the British North American colonial society to large extent by leading to the
development of distinct regions throughout the colonies and leading to the dependence of Southern society on slave
labor.
To begin with, the transatlantic trade involved many of the British North American colonies, but, at each port,
different items were exchanged, leading to the development of distinct economical regions between these colonies;
these unique economies, in turn, shaped British American colonial society. For example, the Massachussetts Bay
Colony in the northern region had originally been founded on the principle of religious tolerance (for select religions
excluding Catholicism and Judaism). Located along the coast, this colony quickly became apart of transatlantic
trade, which led to the formation of the colony's economy. The economy of the Massachussetts Bay Colony became
based around fishing, but, more importantly, shipbuilding, as a merchant class evolved within this economy and
sought to partake in the transatlantic trade. As a result, this colony was more reliant on commerce than agriculture,
leading to tightly spaced and closer knit communities, allowing these societies to become more connected and
reliant on the church. In the South, the colony of Virginia was originally founded upon the principles of "God, Gold,
and Glory". However, after harsh seasons and the discovery of the absence of gold, the colonists grew discontent.
But, the transatlantic slave trade gradually increased the wealth of Virginian colonists by encouraging these
colonists to grow and trade crops, such as tobacco, a cash crop, in the profitable transatlantic trade. As a result, the
Virginian economy became reliant on agriculture, a lot of land was dedicated to farming, and societies became more
spread out and less tightly knit than Northern colonies.
In addition to creating distinct regions, the transatlantic trade introduced Southern colonies to slave labor and
gradually increased these colonies' dependence on slave labor over time. For example, in 1607, the first Africans
arrived in Virginia, but it was a very small amount. More importantly, these Africans arrived as indentured servants,
with freedom promised to them after a designated number of years of service. However, the development of the
transatlantic trade made the South reliant on slaves not only by demanding more and more agricultural output from
the South, but also by supplying the South with the slaves through the transatlantic slave trade. In the transatlantic
slave trade, Europeans in Africa would kidnap Africans or bribe African tribes to kidnap rival tribe members put on
ships destined for British North America. Once these ships reached the South, the slaves were auctioned off. The
increase of slave labor in the South also led the creation of Southern plantations, a unique characteristic of Southern
society that represented the South even after the transatlantic slave trade ended (this is evident in media such as
Gone with the Wind).
While the transatlantic trade may have created regions and developed slavery, it did act as a continuity in
furthering the British North American colonies' ties with England. As a crucial part of transatlantic trade, the
colonies sold much of their raw materials to consumers in England. The profits from this trade constituted a large
part of the colonial economy and made the colonies dependent on England. For example, when the colonists were
angry at the Tea Act, which gave the British East India Company a monopoly over the tea trade, colonists rebelled
through the Boston Tea Party, in which vast amounts of expensive of tea were dumped into the Boston Harbor. The
colonists retaliated in this way because they were angry that England had the ability to grant monopoly rights to the
British East India Company but they also acknowledged that by ruining the tea, they were harming the crucial
economic tie between the colonies in England. Considering this example and others, it begins to be revealed that the
transatlantic trade actually did cause change in relation to the colonies and England in that it stirred political
activism in colonial society by creating a tie so strong that the colonists felt no choice but to retaliate and break this
economic bond with England as part of a way to obtain independence in their economies, politics, and society.
Page 1 of 1 2
B
The arrival of Columbus in the Americas had set off a larrge and immense movment of people from all the major
coutnries of the Netherlands, Spain, France, and the British to North and South America. The British, however, was
the the main powera as thir navy was the storngest amongst any of his other opponents, and had the wealth and
resoures to be able to take the area of land East of North America to form its colonies. They had established the city
of Jamestown, the first permanent colonial settlement, and were able to expand with the ability of their large military
power to form a total of 13 colonies connectign each other through the Atlantic Ocean. From the period of 1607 to
1776, the growth of the transatlantic slave trade changed British North American colonial society as it started to
bring an exahnge of large amoutns of goods and reosurces while also prioriting the idea of mercantilism in the
colonies. However, the trade had also establsihed the use of slavery in the predominant Southern colonies whose
effect would last for years to come even after American independcne.
The transatlatic slave trade had establsihed a network of network of exchange of resources, however heavily
implented the idea of self-profit through mercantilism. Resoruces such as tomatoes, corn, and, and turkey was
introdued to the British society while bringing resoruces such as potatoes and horses to the colonies. They had
estabished the ability to exploit colonists and people born in the Americans for their own will and profit thir home
nation of Britain. Although the colonists also profits from this from of trade, they were being used by the British to
work for them as they also constructed the social classes of people to tkae charge of the ability, strenght, and
upsrings of the others.
The form of trade had also idtrodcted slavery into the nation, to replace Idians for a form of indentured servitude.
Slaves were purchsed form Africa and brought to the Americas to work in the SOuthern palntations set up in the
solonies. As the colonies in the South had better climate, they were able to use a form of labor that would not have
to ask for any form of pay or reward. This had forced the southern economy to be enrooted towards the idea of
slavery and run its economy off the proficts made from agriculture and slavery. The pattern of southern slavery is
continued all throughout decades all the way to the idea of sectionalism, nullification, and the Civil War as the
slave-establsuhed states of the new country had started to separated due to the issue of slavery, contaaining it, and
abolishing it,
Page 1 of 1 2
C
In 1492, Christopher Columbus had fled from Europe founded the Americas caused a chain of events where he led
several countries in Europe including the Spanish, French, and British to colonize the land and have and exchange of
goods called The Columbian Exchange of which allowed them to have access to goods from the Americas but as a
result brought in diseases of which killed millions of Native Americans which only gave them access to more land
and caused more migration over to the New World causing several colonies to settle down continusly traded with
Europe with their new goods from the Americas which helped grow the transatlantic trade route. The growth of this
route allowed for a lot of change in the British North American colonial society like helping them realize their want
for representation and ending up independent from the British.
AP® United States History 2023 Scoring Commentary
Long Essay Question 2
Note: Student samples are quoted verbatim and may contain spelling and grammatical errors.
Overview
• Responses were expected to demonstrate knowledge of the extent to which the growth of
transatlantic trade changed British North American colonial society from 1607 to 1776.
• Responses could utilize a wide range of content knowledge, including colonists’ relationships
with Native Americans, the overtaking of Native American lands, diversity among British
colonial regions, imperial policies, such as the Navigation Acts, and the extent to which they
were enforced (salutary neglect), the triangle trade, mercantilism, systems of labor
(indentured servitude and chattel slavery) and reactions to these systems (Bacon’s Rebellion
and the Stono Rebellion), Anglicization, the spread of ideological movements (the
Enlightenment and the Great Awakening), various revenue acts following the Seven Years’
War, and the gradual movement toward independence and the ideals expressed in relevant
revolutionary documents (e.g., Declaration of Independence).
• This question primarily addressed Topics 2.3, 2.4, 2.6, 2.7, 3.3, and 3.4.
Sample: 2A
Thesis/Claim: 1
Contextualization: 1
Evidence: 2
Analysis and Reasoning: 2
Total Score: 6
A. Thesis/Claim (0–1 points): 1
The response earned 1 point for a thesis that responds to the prompt with a clear and historically
defensible claim that establishes a line of reasoning. The overall argument asserts that transatlantic
trade changed colonial society while qualifying those changes with reference to some continuities in
colonial society. Located in the first paragraph, the thesis states, “Although it furthered the British
North American colonies’ ties to England, transatlantic trade succeeded in drastically changing the
British North American colonial society to large extent by leading to the development of distinct
regions throughout the colonies and leading to the dependence of Southern society on slave labor.”
B. Contextualization (0–1 points): 1
The response earned 1 point for contextualization. The response starts with a description of the
endeavors of several European explorers who had monarchial support and whose voyages were
facilitated by newer navigation innovations.
© 2023 College Board.
Visit College Board on the web: collegeboard.org.
AP® United States History 2023 Scoring Commentary
Long Essay Question 2 (continued)
C. Evidence (0–2 points): 2
The response earned 1 point for using evidence relevant to the topic of the prompt. For example, in
the middle of the second paragraph, the response identifies that “the Massachussetts Bay Colony in
the northern region had originally been founded on the principle of religious tolerance.” Also, in the
same paragraph, the response identifies a second example that this colony’s economy was “based
around fishing, but more importantly shipbuilding.”
The response earned 1 point for using at least two specific historical examples to support an
argument. The response identifies and explains the growing differences among colonial regions due
to religious motivations behind colonial settlement and the economic development of different
colonies. The response correctly identifies and explains further distinctions in the development of
the southern colonies due to the introduction of and reliance on enslaved African laborers.
D. Analysis and Reasoning (0–2 points): 2
The response earned 1 point for using historical reasoning to frame or structure an argument that
addresses the prompt. In the fourth paragraph, the response claims that transatlantic trade also
provided continuity in the development of the colonies by “furthering the British North American
colonies’ ties with England.” The response then goes on to demonstrate an understanding of this
continuity by identifying the economic linkage between raw materials being exported from the
colonies and sold to consumers in England.
The response earned 1 point for demonstrating a complex understanding. The response corroborates
its argument about economic developments across colonial regions. The second paragraph contains
a nuanced discussion of the evolving merchant class in Massachusetts and the Virginian economy
that grew to become reliant on agriculture after the introduction of tobacco. The conclusion of the
fourth paragraph also extends the discussion of the continuity of economic ties by claiming that
colonists who were angered by the Tea Act began protesting by destroying tea specifically because
it was such a strong symbol of their ties with the mother country.
Sample: 2B
Thesis/Claim: 1
Contextualization: 1
Evidence: 1
Analysis and Reasoning: 1
Total Score: 4
A. Thesis/Claim (0–1 points): 1
The response earned 1 point for the thesis. The thesis can be found in the last two sentences of the
introductory paragraph. The claim responds to the prompt with a historically defensible line of
reasoning.
© 2023 College Board.
Visit College Board on the web: collegeboard.org.
AP® United States History 2023 Scoring Commentary
Long Essay Question 2 (continued)
B. Contextualization (0–1 points): 1
The response earned 1 point for contextualization. The opening paragraph of the response describes
the arrival of Christopher Columbus in the Americas and migration to the Americas from other
European countries. The response continues by describing how the British came to dominate trade.
C. Evidence (0–2 points): 1
The response earned 1 point for using evidence relevant to the topic of the prompt. For example, the
response describes mercantilism in the second paragraph. A second example of evidence is
identified in the third paragraph and describes indentured servants and enslaved labor.
While the response contains at least two specific historical examples relevant to the prompt, they are
not used in support of an argument in response to the prompt sufficient to earn the second point.
D. Analysis and Reasoning (0–2 points): 1
The response earned 1 point for using historical reasoning. The response uses the historical
reasoning skill of causation to structure an argument that addresses the prompt. The second
paragraph successfully explains how Great Britain used mercantilism to benefit from resources
acquired from American colonies to benefit Great Britain. The third paragraph successfully explains
the change from indentured servitude to enslaved labor and changes in the economy of the southern
colonies.
The response did not earn the point for demonstrating a complex understanding. It does not attempt
to corroborate, qualify, or modify an argument that addresses the topic of the prompt.
Sample: 2C
Thesis/Claim: 1
Contextualization: 1
Evidence: 0
Analysis and Reasoning: 0
Total Score: 2
A. Thesis/Claim (0–1 points): 1
The response earned 1 point for the thesis. The final sentence makes a claim about transatlantic
trade: “The growth of this route allowed for a lot of change in the British North American colonial
society like helping them realize their want for representation and ending up independent from the
British.” This claim responds to the prompt with a historically defensible line of reasoning.
© 2023 College Board.
Visit College Board on the web: collegeboard.org.
AP® United States History 2023 Scoring Commentary
Long Essay Question 2 (continued)
B. Contextualization (0–1 points): 1
The response earned 1 point for contextualization. The first sentence describes a broader historical
context relevant to the prompt by noting that the actions of Christopher Columbus started a chain of
events involving multiple European countries in the quest for land and commerce as part of the
Columbian Exchange.
C. Evidence (0–2 points): 0
The response did not earn the point for evidence because it does not provide specific examples of
evidence relevant to the topic of the prompt.
D. Analysis and Reasoning (0–2 points): 0
The response did not earn the point for using historical reasoning because there is no relevant
analysis using the reasoning of causation, continuity and change, or comparison to structure an
argument that addresses the prompt.
The response did not earn the point for demonstrating a complex understanding. It does not attempt
to corroborate, qualify, or modify an argument that addresses the question.
© 2023 College Board.
Visit College Board on the web: collegeboard.org.